Gianotti-Crosti Syndrome is a rare skin disease affecting children between the ages of nine months and nine years. Major symptoms may include blisters on the skin of the legs, buttocks and arms. The disorder is usually preceded by a viral infection. Gianotti-Crosti Syndrome is characterized by blisters on the skin that may or may not itch.  They are usually found on the face, buttocks, arms or legs. The blisters consist of large, flat-topped, fluid filled sacks.  They usually occur along with upper respiratory tract infection.  The blisters usually last from twenty to twenty-five days; they do not usually recur.  There may be an enlargement of the lymph nodes in the trunk area of the body. Gianotti-Crosti Syndrome usually occurs after a bout with a viral disease such as:  Coxsackievirus, Hepatitis-B, Infectious Mononucleosis or Cytomegalovirus, or after vaccination with a live virus serum. The cause of Gianotti-Crosti Syndrome is thought to be a reaction to a previous viral infection.  In many countries the predisposing cause is usually the Hepatitis-B virus.  In North America other viruses are more often the predisposing cause.  The exact reasons for this cause and effect situation are unknown. Gianotti-Crosti Syndrome usually affects children between the ages of nine months and nine years of age.  It affects males and females in equal numbers. Although the disorder is regularly associated with Hepatitis-B infections in other countries, in North America it is rarely the cause. Because Gianotti-Crosti Syndrome is a self-limiting disorder, the treatment of affected children is primarily symptomatic and supportive. For example, in some cases, the use of topical ointments or certain medications by mouth may be recommended to help alleviate mild to potentially severe itching (pruritus). The skin lesions associated with Gianotti-Crosti Syndrome typically spontaneously resolve within approximately 15 to 60 days. When associated findings include enlargement of the lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy) and/or enlargement of the liver (i.e., in association with liver inflammation [hepatitis]), such findings may persist for several months after initial symptom onset.
