"TORCH Syndrome refers to infection of a developing fetus or newborn by any of a group of infectious agents. ""TORCH"" is an acronym meaning (T)oxoplasmosis, (O)ther Agents, (R)ubella (also known as German Measles), (C)ytomegalovirus, and (H)erpes Simplex. Infection with any of these agents (i.e., Toxoplasma gondii, rubella virus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex viruses) may cause a constellation of similar symptoms in affected newborns. These may include fever; difficulties feeding; small areas of bleeding under the skin, causing the appearance of small reddish or purplish spots; enlargement of the liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly); yellowish discoloration of the skin, whites of the eyes, and mucous membranes (jaundice); hearing impairment; abnormalities of the eyes; and/or other symptoms and findings. Each infectious agent may also result in additional abnormalities that may be variable, depending upon a number of factors (e.g., stage of fetal development). TORCH Syndrome results from one of the TORCH agents having crossed the placenta during pregnancy.  These infectious agents include Toxoplasma gondii, the single-celled microorganism (protozoa) responsible for Toxoplasmosis; rubella virus; cytomegalovirus; and herpes simplex viruses.  (Note: According to some reports, the acronym “TORCH” is sometimes modified to the term “STORCH” to include syphilis, a disease that may result in symptoms similar to those associated with the other TORCH agents.  Syphilis is caused by infection with the bacterium Treponema pallidum.  In addition, TORCH may encompass other disease-causing agents, such as varicella-zoster virus, which is the virus responsible for chickenpox, and parvovirus.) TORCH syndrome may affect a developing fetus or newborn, potentially resulting in miscarriage, delayed fetal growth and maturation (intrauterine growth retardation), or early delivery. Treatment of newborns and infants with TORCH Syndrome is based upon the specific causative agent, the stage of fetal development when infection initially occurred, the severity of the infection and associated symptoms and findings, and/or other factors. For infants with toxoplasmosis, treatment may include administration of the medication pyrimethamine with sulfadiazine. Herpes simplex may be treated with the antiviral agent acyclovir. The treatment of newborns and infants with rubella or cytomegalovirus primarily includes symptomatic and supportive measures."
